Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Corrosion Science

ELSEVIER                                                 journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/corsci

# Effect of B and Cr on the high temperature oxidation behaviour of novel γ/γ'-strengthened Co-base superalloys

L. Klein, Y. Shen, M.S. Killian, S. Virtanen *

Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Institute for Surface Science and Corrosion (WW4), Martensstr. 7, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, 91058 Erlangen, Germany

## ARTICLE INFO

### Article history:
Received 16 March 2011
Accepted 24 April 2011
Available online 29 April 2011

### Keywords:
A. Superalloys
A. Ctobal
B. SEM
B. SIMS
C. Oxidation

## ABSTRACT

Isothermal oxidation was carried out on new γ/γ'-strengthened Co-base superalloys of the system Co–Al–W–B and Co–Al–W–B–Cr at 800 and 900 °C in air. ToF-SIMS investigations show that boron accumulates in the inner oxide layer which improves the oxidation behaviour and oxide layer adhesion considerably. B-rich precipitations can be observed in the alloy matrix, as well. Appropriate amounts of chromium as additional alloying element lead to further improvement of the oxidation resistance due to the formation of protective inner Al2O3 and Cr2O3 scales.

© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

## 1. Introduction

Conventional γ/γ'-strengthened Ni-base superalloys are commonly used materials for high temperature applications such as turbine vanes in aircraft engines. This is due to their outstanding mechanical properties and oxidation resistance [1]. In contrast to this class of materials, conventional Co-base superalloys exhibit superior corrosion resistance but inferior mechanical strength at high temperatures [2]. Therefore, these alloys are suitable for use in a mechanically lower loaded corrosive environment [3]. Sato et al. [4] recently identified Co-base superalloys showing high temperature strength values comparable to those of Ni-base superalloys, due to the strengthening effect of a stable ternary compound with the L12 structure, γ' Co3(Al, W), which precipitates in the γ-matrix. However, the high temperature oxidation behaviour of this new class of materials still has to be improved considerably. Klein et al. [5] systematically investigated the oxidation behaviour of γ/γ'-strengthened Co–Al–W superalloys and the influence of different alloying elements. Oxidation of these alloys at high temperatures leads to the formation of an inner Al2O3-rich zone in addition to cobalt oxides and oxides containing mainly Co, Al, and W. This Al2O3-rich zone has the potential to improve the oxidation behaviour considerably [5,6]. The addition of boron to polycrystalline high temperature alloys improves the mechanical properties such as creep strength [7,8], rupture strength, and ductility [2,9]. First creep tests of Bauer et al. [7] on novel boron containing Co-base superalloys indicated that it is possible to achieve a creep strength comparable to Ni-base superalloys.

In the present study, the high temperature oxidation behaviour of novel γ/γ'-strengthened Co–Al–W–B and Co–Al–W–B–Cr alloys was explored at temperatures of 800 and 900 °C. Chromium is expected to improve the oxidation behaviour considerably [10–16], but the effect of boron on the oxidation resistance has not been studied in any detail. However, previous studies of Klein et al. [5] indicated that boron, which was added for improved mechanical properties, can moreover be beneficial for oxidation resistance. These effects are explored in more detail in the present study. Furthermore, the influence of high temperature oxidation on the distribution of boron in the alloy matrix and the oxide layer was of interest. ToF-SIMS investigations were performed in order to detect boron in the alloys. In addition to thermogravimetry, characterisation of the oxide layer morphology and chemical composition was carried out by means of SEM and EDX.

## 2. Experimental procedure

The compositions of the investigated alloys and the utilised abbreviations are shown in Table 1. In order to obtain the desired γ/γ'-microstructure, the as-cast alloys were solution heat treated in a vertical furnace at 1300 °C for 12 h in argon atmosphere and aged in a muffle furnace at 900 °C for 200 h in air. After cutting square samples from the ingot by electro-discharge machining, they were ground and polished up to 1 μm [5].

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49 9131 8527577; fax: +49 9131 8527582.
E-mail addresses: leonhard.klein@ww.uni-erlangen.de (L. Klein), shen.yilei@web.de (Y. Shen), manuela.killian@ww.uni-erlangen.de (M.S. Killian), virtanen@ww.uni-erlangen.de (S. Virtanen).

0010-938X/$ - see front matter © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.corsci.2011.04.020
---

## Table 1
Nominal and measured compositions of the investigated alloys and utilised abbreviations. Compositions marked with "*" could not be determined by means of EDX but were confirmed by GDOES.

| Utilised abbr. | Nominal composition | Measured composition in at.% |||||
|----------------|----------------------|-----|-----|-----|-----|-----|
|                | in at.%              | Co  | Al  | W   | B   | Cr  |
| 0.04B          | Co-9Al-9W-0.04B      | 81.9| 8.4 | 9.7 | 0.04*| -   |
| 0.08B [5]      | Co-9Al-9W-0.08B      | 81.5| 8.9 | 9.5 | 0.08*| -   |
| 0.12B [5]      | Co-9Al-9W-0.12B      | 81.8| 8.8 | 9.3 | 0.12*| -   |
| 0.04B4Cr       | Co-9Al-9W-0.04B-4Cr  | 77.8| 8.6 | 9.5 | 0.04 | 4.1 |
| 0.04B8Cr       | Co-9Al-9W-0.04B-8Cr  | 73.8| 8.7 | 9.3 | 0.04 | 8.2 |

Oxidation of Cr-containing alloys was carried out at 800 °C for different times (25, 50, 100, and 500 h) in order to determine the oxidation behaviour with increasing oxidation time. The results were compared to those of Cr-free 0.04B alloys and conventional as-cast Co-base superalloys "MAR-M 509" (57.85Co–24.86Cr–10.25Ni–2.29W–1.16Ta–3.00C–0.33Zr–0.25Ti; values in at.%) without γ/γ'-microstructure. In addition, different amounts of boron were added to the 0.04B alloy (see Table 1) in order to investigate its influence on the oxidation behaviour.

The morphology of the formed oxide layers was investigated by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM, Jeol JSM 6400 and FE-SEM, Hitachi S4800) of prepared cross-sections. In order to determine the chemical composition across the cross-sections Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX, Oxford Instruments Inc.) measurements were carried out. The qualitative and quantitative chemical composition was determined by EDX mappings and EDX point scans, respectively [5]. In addition, Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy (GDOES, RF GD Profiler, HORIBA Jobin Yvon GmbH) was applied in order to confirm the boron contents of the alloys in Table 1 since EDX is not suited for detecting boron. GDOES measurements were performed with a 4-mm-diameter anode at a radio frequency of 13.56 MHz and a power of 50 W, using high-purity argon as discharge gas at a pressure of 700 Pa. In order to calculate the mean oxide layer thickness at least 20 measurements were carried out using SEM micrographs and image processing programme "ImageJ".

Positive and negative static Time-of-Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (ToF-SIMS, ION-TOF GmbH Münster, TOF.SIMS 5 spectrometer) allowed for determination of the boron distribution in the alloy matrix and the oxide layer by means of ToF-SIMS mappings. Alloys with different B-contents (0.04 at.% B and 0.12 at.% B) as well as differently oxidised alloys (aged; oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C; oxidised for 500 h at 900 °C) were investigated. The samples were irradiated with a pulsed 25 keV Bi+ liquid–metal ion beam. Signals were identified according to their accurate mass and isotopic pattern in the high mass resolution mode (m/Δm > 8000 at 29Si). Chemical mapping of 280 × 280, 250 × 250, and 100 × 100 μm2 areas were recorded in high lateral (and low mass) resolution mode. A lateral resolution of 200–300 nm and a sampling depth of 10–20 Å is achieved with this setting. Images were recorded in positive and negative polarity and care was taken not to exceed the static limit of 1013 ions cm−2. The brightest pixel corresponds to the largest number of counts for the respective fragment (ranging from 2 to 19 counts).

## 3. Results

### 3.1. Influence of the Cr-content on the oxidation behaviour

Fig. 1 shows representative oxidation curves of the alloys 0.04B, 0.04B4Cr, and 0.04B8Cr, which are isothermally oxidised at 800 °C in air. Oxidation of the 0.04B8Cr alloy leads to the lowest mass gain per area, Δm/A, indicating that an appropriate amount of Cr as additional alloying element increases the oxidation resistance considerably. Therefore, 0.04B8Cr alloys show the lowest mean oxide layer thickness of all investigated alloys, after oxidation at 800 °C for 500 h (Table 2). In addition, no further mass gain is measurable for 0.04B8Cr alloys after running the experiment longer than approximately 300 h.

Fig. 1. Mass gain (Δm/A) of 0.04B, 0.04B4Cr, and 0.04B8Cr alloys (oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C).

## Table 2
Mean oxide layer thickness of the investigated oxidised alloys (500 h at 800 °C).

| Alloy    | Mean oxide layer thickness in μm | Standard deviation in μm |
|----------|----------------------------------|-------------------------|
| 0.04B    | 91                               | 14                      |
| 0.08B    | 29                               | 6                       |
| 0.12B [5]| 23                               | 4                       |
| 0.04B4Cr | 32                               | 6                       |
| 0.04B8Cr | 14                               | 3                       |



Figs. 2–4 show a comparison of SEM micrographs and EDX mappings of 0.04B, 0.04B4Cr, and 0.04B8Cr alloys oxidised at 800 °C for 25, 50, 100, and 500 h in air. The oxidation process is very similar to the previously investigated B-containing alloys of Klein et al. [5]. Generally, oxidation for longer times leads to an increase in oxide layer thickness according to the oxidation curves in Fig. 1. At the beginning of exposure, Co-oxide formation takes place at the alloy surface which leads to a Co-depleted zone in the matrix and a subsequent Al- and W-enrichment in these Co-depleted areas. Oxidation at 800 °C also results in inner Al2O3 formation [5], which becomes more pronounced with increasing oxidation time. After approximately 300 h of exposure, 0.04B8Cr alloys show a continuous and protective inner Al2O3 layer, whereas oxidation of 0.04B and 0.04B4Cr leads to a discontinuous Al2O3 layer without comparable protective effect. In addition, the formation of a discontinuous Cr-rich oxide layer can be observed, adjacent to the inner Al2O3 layer. The protective Cr-rich layer seems to benefit not only oxidation resistance but also the formation of a continuous and protective Al2O3 layer. However, predominantly Co3O4 in the outer oxide layer and complex oxides in the inner oxide layer, containing Co, Al, Cr, and W, are formed [5]. Within the inner oxide layer and between the outer and inner oxide layer cracking can be observed in almost all the investigated Cr-containing and 0.04B alloys. This seems to be mainly due to thermal stresses during cooling after taking the samples out of the oven. In addition, the γ/γ'-microstructure of the Cr-containing alloys changes due to the addition of Cr (Fig. 5). The γ'-phases seem to grow together and show less cubic shape.
---
L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720                2715

| Time | SEM | Co | Al | O | W |
|------|-----|----|----|---|---|
| 25 h | SEM 25h | Co 25h | Al 25h | O 25h | W 25h |
| 50 h | SEM 50h | Co 50h | Al 50h | O 50h | W 50h |
| 100 h | SEM 100h | Co 100h | Al 100h | O 100h | W 100h |
| 500 h | SEM 500h | Co 500h | Al 500h | O 500h | W 500h |

Fig. 2. SEM micrographs and EDX mappings of 0.04B oxidised at 800 °C for 25, 50, 100, and 500 h.

| Time | SEM | Co | Al | O | W | Cr |
|------|-----|----|----|---|---|----|
| 25 h | SEM 25h | Co 25h | Al 25h | O 25h | W 25h | Cr 25h |
| 50 h | SEM 50h | Co 50h | Al 50h | O 50h | W 50h | Cr 50h |
| 100 h | SEM 100h | Co 100h | Al 100h | O 100h | W 100h | Cr 100h |
| 500 h | SEM 500h | Co 500h | Al 500h | O 500h | W 500h | Cr 500h |

Fig. 3. SEM micrographs and EDX mappings of 0.04B4Cr oxidised at 800 °C for 25, 50, 100, and 500 h.
---
2716                                                           L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720

| SEM | Co | Al | O | W | Cr |
|-----|----|----|---|---|----|
| 25 h |  |  |  |  |  |
| 50 h |  |  |  |  |  |
| 100 h |  |  |  |  |  |
| 500 h |  |  |  |  |  |

Fig. 4. SEM micrographs and EDX mappings of 0.04B8Cr oxidised at 800 °C for 25, 50, 100, and 500 h.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the γ/γ'-microstructure of 0.04B (a), 0.04B4Cr (b), and 0.04B8Cr alloys (c).



3.2. Influence of the B-content on the oxidation behaviour

Fig. 6 shows representative oxidation curves of the alloys 0.04B, 0.08B, 0.12B [5], and MAR-M 509 which are isothermally oxidised at 800 °C. Oxidation of the high-boron containing 0.12B alloy leads to significantly lower mass gain per area compared to 0.04B and 0.08B alloys. Therefore, 0.12B alloys establish relatively thin oxide layers after oxidation at 800 °C for 500 h [5] (Table 2). No further mass gain is measurable for the 0.12B [5] and 0.08B alloys after running the experiment longer than approximately 150–200 h. In contrast, 0.04B alloys continuously oxidise at 800 °C. In Fig. 6, additional SEM micrographs of the B-containing alloys, after oxidation at 800 °C for 500 h, show that higher B-contents lead to better oxide layer adhesion, continuous inner Al2O3 layer formation and therefore thinner oxide scales. In the previous study, Klein et al. [5] already assumed that an appropriate content of boron plays an important role in the oxidation process and enhances oxide layer adhesion and oxidation resistance. However, conventional Co-base superalloys such as MAR-M 509 still exhibit better oxidation resistance at 800 °C (oxidised for 100 h) compared to the B-containing alloys (see Fig. 6).

3.3. ToF-SIMS measurements

In order to determine the B-distribution in the oxide layer and alloy matrix, ToF-SIMS investigations are carried out on different Co–Al–W–B alloys. Fig. 7 shows ToF-SIMS mappings of aged 0.12B alloy (a), 0.04B alloy oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C (b), 0.12B alloy oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C (c), and 0.12B alloy oxidised for 500 h at 900 °C (d). B-enrichment at the grain boundaries can be detected for all investigated alloys. Even low B-contents (Fig. 7b) are sufficient to cause pronounced B-accumulation at the grain boundaries and therefore strengthen them. Precipitations within the γ/γ'-matrix exhibit high B-contents, as well (Fig. 7b–d). In addition to the observed grain boundary strengthening, high temperature oxidation leads to B-enrichment in the inner oxide layer and a resulting B-depleted zone at the matrix/oxide layer interface (Fig. 7d). However, in the outer oxide layer almost no boron can be detected. According to ToF-SIMS results in Fig. 8, the inner oxide layer and the detected precipitations within the γ/γ'-matrix are confirmed to be rich in tungsten borides. The utilised resin for sample embedding can be identified as the signal-free zone in Figs. 7 and 8 beyond the outer oxide layer.
---
L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720                                                       2717

Mass gain graph

Fig. 6. Mass gain (Δm/A) of 0.04B, 0.08B, 0.12B [5], and MAR-M 509 alloys (oxidised at 800 °C).

| Time in h | 0.04B | 0.08B | 0.12B [5] | MAR-M 509 |
|-----------|-------|-------|-----------|------------|
| 0         | 0     | 0     | 0         | 0          |
| 100       | ~6    | ~5.5  | ~3.5      | ~1         |
| 200       | ~8    | ~6    | ~3.5      | ~1         |
| 300       | ~9.5  | ~6    | ~3.5      | ~1         |
| 400       | ~10.5 | ~6    | ~3.5      | ~1         |
| 500       | ~11.5 | ~6.5  | ~4        | ~1         |

ToF-SIMS mappings

Fig. 7. ToF-SIMS mappings of the boron distribution in aged 0.12B (a), 0.04B oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C (b), 0.12B oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C (c), and 0.12B oxidised for 500 h at 900 °C (d).

a) Grain boundary and γ/γ'-matrix visible. Scale bar: 100 μm
b) γ/γ'-matrix, precipitation, and grain boundary visible. Scale bar: 50 μm
c) γ/γ'-matrix, grain boundary, and precipitations visible. Scale bar: 100 μm
d) Inner oxide layer, outer oxide layer, B-depleted zone, and γ/γ'-matrix visible. Scale bar: 50 μm


---
2718                                                           L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720

| a) | b) |
|---|---|
| Inner oxide layer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Outer oxide layer | Inner oxide layer &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Outer oxide layer |
| Image a | Image b |
| Precipitations<br>γ/γ'-matrix | γ/γ'-matrix &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Precipitations |

Fig. 8. ToF-SIMS mappings of the tungsten (a) and boron (b) distribution in 0.12B oxidised for 500 h at 800 °C.

## 4. Discussion

High temperature oxidation of Cr-containing Co-base superalloys at 800 °C shows that an appropriate amount of Cr as additional alloying element results in improved oxidation resistance due to the formation of protective inner Al2O3 and Cr-rich oxide scales. It is assumed that the Cr-rich oxides are mostly composed of CoCr2O4 and protective Cr2O3 [11]. The oxidation resistance of 0.04B8Cr at 800 °C is comparable to conventional Co-base superalloys such as MAR-M 509 (Figs. 1 and 6). Oxide layer growth on the 0.04B8Cr alloy is decelerated considerably compared to 0.04B4Cr and 0.04B alloys, and therefore governed mainly by the growth of Cr2O3 [11] and Al2O3. According to EDX mappings in Figs. 2–4, Cr2O3 seems to have a positive effect on the formation of a continuous Al2O3 scale. Previous studies [12,13] already reported a dou-ble layer of protective Cr2O3 and Al2O3 beneath an external layer of Co(Ni)O in Co(Ni)–Cr–Al alloys. However, protective properties of Cr2O3 are reduced at temperatures above 1000 °C and in oxidising atmospheres with high flow rates due to oxidation of Cr2O3 to volatile CrO3 [14–16]. The investigated 0.04B4Cr and 0.04B8Cr alloys also reveal an altered γ/γ'-microstructure compared to Cr-free 0.04B alloys (Fig. 5). The γ'-phases seem to grow together and show less cubic shape which may result in reduced high temperature strength of the alloys. Therefore, γ'-stabilising elements such as Ni, Mo, or Ta [10] may be added as additional alloying elements.

The motivation of B-addition is based on its effect on the mechanical properties of the alloy such as improved rupture strength and ductility due to increased grain boundary strength. This is caused by B-accumulation at the grain boundaries [2,8,17–19] which has previously been reported for Ni alloys, as well [20]. Improvements in oxidation resistance and oxide layer adhesion can also be achieved by high B-containing Co-base superalloys [5]. In Fig. 6, 0.12B shows the best results compared to 0.08B and 0.04B. Most likely B-enrichment in the inner oxide layer (Fig. 7d) can be considered to be the reason for better oxide layer adhesion and improved oxidation behaviour of high B-containing alloys. In this context, boron seems to benefit the formation of a continuous Al2O3 layer at the alloy/oxide layer interface (see Fig. 6). However, the concentration of Al in the 0.04B alloys is about 0.2–0.5 at.% lower compared to the other alloy variants in Table 1. This may have a negative effect on the Al2O3 formation and be an additional reason for the reduced oxidation resistance of 0.04B alloys. In addition to the B-rich inner oxide layer, precipitations within the alloy matrix reveal high B-contents (see Fig. 7) and may have an influence on the oxidation behaviour and high temperature strength, as well. The detected B-accumulations most likely consist of tungsten borides according to supplementary ToF-SIMS measurements (Fig. 8). Ojo et al. [19] and Zhang et al. [21] recently reported considerable amounts of fine M5B3-type borides ("M" stands for a metal atom) mainly along the grain boundaries of directionally solidified Rene 80 alloys in addition to generally reported M3B2-type borides that form in the alloy during ingot solidification [22–24]. M5B3-type borides also have been observed in Hf-doped IN 792 + Hf superalloys [25] and in Ni3Al-based intermetallic compounds [26]. Therefore, fine boride particles in the inner oxide layer and at the grain boundaries of the investigated alloys very likely consist of mainly W5B3 and larger borides within the grains may consist of W3B2.

SEM micrographs

Fig. 9. SEM micrographs of MAR-M 509 oxidised for 100 h at 800 °C.
---
L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720                                                         2719

| SEM | Co | Cr | Ni | W |
|-----|----|----|----|----|
| SEM | Co | Cr | Ni | W |
| Ta | Zr | Ti | C | O |
| Ta | Zr | Ti | C | O |

Fig. 10. SEM micrograph and EDX mappings of MAR-M 509 oxidised for 100 h at 800 °C.



Comparing the investigated alloys with conventional γ'-free Co-base superalloys such as MAR-M 509, significant differences in the oxidation behaviour can be observed. Figs. 9 and 10 show SEM micrographs and EDX mappings of MAR-M 509 oxidised for 100 h at 800 °C. In addition to an outer cobalt oxide and nickel oxide rich layer (very likely Co3O4 and NiO), Cr-rich oxides can be detected in the inner oxide layer providing excellent oxidation resistance at high temperatures [11]. However, complex oxides may also form especially in the inner oxide layer similar to the investigated γ/γ'-strengthened alloys in this study. Furthermore, precipitations containing Ta, Ti, and Zr (see Fig. 10), which have previously been reported by Beltran et al. [27], are necessary to strengthen MAR-M 509 alloys [11]. Larger precipitates may have grown at the expense of smaller ones and dominate the microstructure of the investigated MAR-M 509 alloy (see Fig. 9). Because of non-uniform oxidation behaviour and spallation of the outer oxide layer no reasonable mean oxide layer thickness can be determined for MAR-M 509. Compared to the oxidation behaviour of 0.04B, 0.08B, 0.12B, and 0.04B4Cr alloys (see Figs. 1 and 6), MAR-M 509 shows superior oxidation resistance at 800 °C. However, 0.04B8Cr alloys show comparable mass gain due to high-Cr contents. Increasing the B-content of the Cr-containing alloys (0.04B4Cr and 0.04B8Cr) may even further improve oxidation resistance, oxide layer adhesion, and high temperature strength. As a result, 0.12B8Cr alloys most likely would outrange conventional Co-base superalloys such as MAR-M 509 regarding the oxidation behaviour at 800 °C in air. However, stabilisation of the γ'-phase (by means of Ni, Mo, or Ta [10]) is necessary in order to maintain superior high temperature creep strengths which are comparable to Ni-base superalloys [7].

5. Conclusions

Isothermal oxidation in air was carried out on novel γ/γ'-strengthened Co-base superalloys of the system Co-Al-W-B and Co-Al-W-B-Cr. High amounts of boron (0.12 at.%) and an appropriate content of Cr as additional alloying element significantly improve the oxidation resistance of the material. This is due to the formation of protective inner Cr2O3 and Al2O3 layers after oxidising Cr-containing samples at 800 °C. In addition, boron accumulates in the inner oxide layer which leads to further improvement of the oxide layer adhesion of high boron-containing alloys. According to ToF-SIMS measurements most likely tungsten borides accumulate in the inner oxide layer but also in precipitations within the γ/γ'-matrix. In addition, the γ/γ'-microstructure of high-chromium containing alloys has to be stabilised in order to maintain the desired high temperature strength. This may lead to the development of new γ/γ'-strengthened Co-base superalloys with superior oxidation resistance and high temperature strength compared to conventional Co-base superalloys (e.g. MAR-M 509).

Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful for financial support from the German Research Foundation (DFG) and for the scientific support within the research training group (Graduiertenkolleg 1229) of the DFG. The authors would also like to thank Natalie Kömpel for the GDOES measurements and the Institute of General Material Properties (WW1) for giving them the opportunity to use their scanning electron microscope (JEOL JSM 6400).

References

[1] C.T. Sims, W.C. Hagel, In The Superalloys, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1972.
[2] C.T. Sims, N.S. Stoloff, W.C. Hagel, In Superalloys II, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1987.
[3] A.M. Beltran, In Superalloys II, John Wiley & Sons, NY, 1987.
[4] J. Sato, T. Omori, K. Oikawa, I. Ohnuma, R. Kainuma, K. Ishida, Science 312 (2006) 90–91.
---
2720                                                                           L. Klein et al. / Corrosion Science 53 (2011) 2713–2720

| [5] L. Klein, A. Bauer, S. Neumeier, M. Göken, S. Virtanen, Corros. Sci. 53 (2011) 2027–2034. | [16] G.R. Wallwork, A.Z. Hed, Oxid. Met. 3 (1971) 229–241. |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------|
| [6] T.M. Pollock, J. Dibbern, M. Tsunekane, J. Zhu, A. Suzuki, JOM 62 (2010) 58–63. | [17] S.Y. Wang, C.Y. Wang, D.L. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd. 368 (2004) 308–311. |
| [7] A. Bauer, S. Neumeier, F. Pyczak, M. Göken, Scr. Mater. 63 (2010) 1197–1200. | [18] G.B. Olson, in Proceedings of the 34th Sagamore Army Material Research Conference, Lake George, NY, 1987, 3. |
| [8] J. Preußner, E. Fleischmann, R. Völkl, U. Glatzel, Int. J. Mater. Res. 101 (2010) 577–579. | [19] O.A. Ojo, H.R. Zhang, Metall. Mater. Trans. A 39 (2008) 2799–2803. |
| [9] K. Shinagawa, T. Omori, K. Oikawa, R. Kainuma, K. Ishida, Scr. Mater. 61 (2009) 612–615. | [20] P.S. Khadkikar, K. Vedula, B.S. Shabel, Metall. Trans. A 18A (1987) 425–428. |
| [10] D. Coutsouradis, A. Davin, M. Lamberigts, Mater. Sci. Eng. 88 (1987) 11–19. | [21] H.R. Zhang, O.A. Ojo, J. Mater. Sci. 43 (2008) 6024–6028. |
| [11] G. Hou, Z. Liu, H. Wei, Q. Zheng, X. Sun, H. Guan, Z. Hu, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 24 (2008) 883–890. | [22] O.A. Ojo, N.L. Richards, M.C. Chaturvedi, Scripta Mater. 51 (2004) 683–688. |
| [12] G.R. Wallwork, A.Z. Hed, Oxid. Met. 3 (1971) 171–184. | [23] N. Yukawa, Y. Murata, T. Noda, Superalloys 1984, TMS, Warrendale, PA (2000), 83–92. |
| [13] C.S. Giggins, F.S. Pettit, J. Electrochem. Soc. 118 (1971) 1782–1790. | [24] F. Zupanic, Mater. Technol. 36 (2002) 361–365. |
| [14] S. Jansen, E.A. Gulbransen, 4th International Congress on Metallic Corrosion, Amsterdam, NL, 1969. | [25] S.M. Seo, I.S. Kim, J.H. Lee, C.Y. Jo, H. Miyahara, K. Ogi, Metall. Mater. Trans. A 38A (2007) 883–893. |
| [15] W.C. Hagel, T. Am. Soc. Metal. 56 (1963) 583–599. | [26] J. Garcia Barriocanal, P. Perez, G. Garces, P. Adeva, Intermetallics 15 (2007) 1096–1104. |
| | [27] A.M. Beltran, C.T. Sims, N.T. Wagenheim, JOM (1969) 39–47. |